RFC-9: Zipped OME-Zarr (#316)
ome/ngff: rfc/9/index.md

Because storage of OME-Zarr images in ZIP archives is not standardized, it is difficult to implement efficient storage and access patterns.
This can lead to format incompatibilities that may not only affect the adoption of OME-Zarr in conventional use cases, but may undermine the standardization goals of the OME-NGFF community as a whole.

## Proposal

To improve user experience with OME-Zarr in conventional use cases, standardize the storage of OME-Zarr hierarchies within ZIP archives.

Specifically:

- Add the ZIP format as a single-file storage container for OME-Zarr.
- Specify the location of OME-Zarr's root-level `zarr.json` within the ZIP archive.
- Recommend essential ZIP/Zarr storage parameters for creating OME-Zarr zip files.
- Disallow embedding OME-Zarr zip files in parent OME-Zarr hierarchies ("recursion").
- Define an OME-Zarr-specific file extension for OME-Zarr zip files.

To minimize implementation effort and maximize compatibility, this RFC proposes a concrete archive file format as a single-file OME-Zarr storage container.

> The ZIP archive file format was chosen for its simplicity, widespread adoption (e.g. on-board tooling of various operating systems, existing OME-Zarr implementations) and possibility for chunked file access enabled by the "central directory" header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ZIP archive file format was chosen for its simplicity, widespread adoption (e.g. on-board tooling of various operating systems, existing OME-Zarr implementations) and possibility for chunked file access enabled by the "central directory".
```

The word "header" here is confusing.

In order to avoid inconsistencies when renaming OME-Zarr zip files, this RFC proposes to require the ZIP archive root to coincide with the OME-Zarr root directory.
In other words, according to this specification, the OME-Zarr's root-level `zarr.json` MUST be located in the root of the ZIP archive and not in a subfolder within the ZIP archive.
Potential problems (e.g. loss of data) resulting from "accidentally" extracting the ZIP archive in-place (e.g. using on-board tooling of some operating systems) can be alleviated by introducing a custom file extension (see below).

To facilitate efficient storage and access of OME-Zarr zip files, a set of essential ZIP/Zarr parameters are recommended in this RFC:

- Use the ZIP64 format.
  This is the default in most modern tooling and enables the creation of single-file OME-Zarr larger than 4 GiB.
- Disable ZIP-level compression.
  This avoids unnecessary compression of already compressed data (e.g. when using Zarr compression codecs) and makes it easier to directly conduct partial reads of the ZIP archive.
- Use the Zarr sharding codec.
  This reduces the number of records in the central directory header.

> - Include all `zarr.json` files at the beginning of the file and at the beginning of the central directory header in a breadth-first order, starting with the root-level `zarr.json` as the first entry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This reduces the number of records in the central directory.
- Include all `zarr.json` files at the beginning of the file and at the beginning of the central directory in a breadth-first order, starting with the root-level `zarr.json` as the first entry.
```

  This enables efficient metadata processing and discovery of the hierarchy structure.

> - Include an OME-Zarr-specific archive comment in the ZIP file header, indicating compliance with these recommendations.

Reviewer: This line may need revision.

## Drawbacks, risks, alternatives, and unknowns

Drawbacks:

- **Disadvantages of the ZIP archive file format** when writing and accessing file contents.

>   These disadvantages were considered to be outweighed by other aspects (see _Proposal_ section).

Reviewer: I think we could more clearly elaborate what the disadvantages are here.

```suggestion
- **Disadvantages of the ZIP archive file format** when writing and accessing file contents relate to the structure of the central directory.
     - ** The zip file central directory is a flat, non-hierarchical list near the end of the file **. While zip files contain a compact central directory that other archive file formats lack, the directory is a simple list occurring in no particular order. This specification exploits the lack of order to list the zarr.json files first, consolidating the metadata while outlining the Zarr hierarchy. Implementations may need to parse the directory into a hash table structure or sort the directory to facilitate locating files efficiently.
     - ** A large number of entries may make the central directory difficult to parse or search directly. **. The time complexity of the reading the directory is `O(N)` where `N` is the number of all files in the archive. A single array containing a large number of chunks in individual files may adversely affect the ability to locate chunks in other arrays contained within the archive. To mitigate this, shards are recommended to decrease the number of entries in the central directory. The use of the `sharding_indexed` codec delegates the indexing of the numerous chunks to the ordered index in the shard. With Zarr shards, the zip central directory may then mainly consist of entries describing the location of array and group metadata as well as the location of the shards.
    - ** Adding files to the zip file requires rewriting the central directory **. Since the central directory occurs near the end of the file, adding new files or expanding existing files requires that the central directory be removed, the new content added, and then central directory rewritten. This can be mitigated by adding many files at once and then closing the file once rather than adding them one by one and closing the file after each addition.
     - ** Individual file headers may describe obsolete files **. While the central directory contains the canonical list of files near the end of a zip archive, obsolete files and their file headers may still be present earlier in the archive. Files detected while streaming a zip file may not represent the latest version of a file or files that may have been deleted. It may be advantageous to extract individual files to manipulate them and then rebuild the archive when processing is complete rather than trying to modify files within the archive.
    - ** Removing a file from a zip archive, may not reduce the file size of an archive depending on the implementation.** Removing a file from a zip archive may only remove the file's entry in the central directory. Free space within a zip archive is not explicitly tracked and thus cannot be easily reclaimed or reused. Therefore, it is not recommended to overwrite or delete files within a zip archive frequently such as during image processing operations.
  These disadvantages were considered to be outweighed by other aspects (see _Proposal_ section).
```

The technical issues have to a certain extent been alleviated by the [sharding codec](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/codecs/sharding-indexed/index.html) introduced upstream with Zarr v3. However, the challenges related to tool development and user experience remain. To address the latter, users and implementers have already begun to store OME-Zarr hierarchies in archive files (specifically, ZIP; see *Prior art and references* section), albeit in an unstandardized fashion. This may lead to file format incompatibilities and thus not only hinders widespread adoption of OME-Zarr in conventional use cases, but undermines the standardization goals of the OME-NGFF community.

## Proposal

To improve user experience with OME-Zarr in conventional use cases, standardize the storage of (potentially composite) images in single files.

Specifically:
- Semantically define the term "composite image"
- Specify a specialization of OME-Zarr for storing a single composite image
- Remain agnostic to implementation details/storage backends (e.g., "ZIPStore", "DirectoryStore")

> Most processing workflows in bioimage analysis independently apply the same set of operations to individual images, which can in turn consist of multiple parts (fields of view, multiple imaging modalities, dervided data such as label masks, etc). Such "composite images" are well-suited for storage as OME-Zarr, not least because of OME-Zarr's planned support for coordinate systems and transformations (RFC-5) as well as collections (RFC-8). In the context of this RFC, **composite images** are semantically defined by the (e.g. spatial) relatedness of their contents and by their independence (i.e. notion of atomic processing units) shared among a large majority of tools. 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps the file contents should be defined as a "multiscale image" or a "collection" (with reference to the collections RFC).

Naturally, while abstract in definition, a composite image as defined above is what should constitute the sole contents of a **single-image OME-Zarr**. As such, this RFC specifies a specialization of OME-Zarr in its general form. With such a definition in place, when presented with a single-image OME-Zarr, tools supporting the specialization should in principle rely on being able to consume it as a single unit for processing. For example, an image viewer could be prompted to load and visualize a single-image OME-Zarr in its entirety, without having to present an "image browser" to the user for selecting which parts to load.

> How single-image OME-Zarrs are to be stored (i.e. storage backend) should remain implementation-specific. However, to avoid file format incompatibilities among images stored using the same backend, the **discovery of data** within the storage unit (e.g. file system directory, archive) should be specified. Specifically, for a single-image OME-Zarr to be valid, the storage unit's root must either correspond to the Zarr root, or contain exactly one directory which is the Zarr root (entrypoint specification). This should, for example, discourage the creation of "single-image" archives (e.g. zipped OME-Zarr) where the Zarr's root-level `zarr.json` is located somewhere else than in the archive's root or in a single directory below it. Note that - unlike the semantic definition regarding the contents of a single-image OME-Zarr (see above) - this entrypoint specification can be formally validated.

Reviewer 3: I agree and heartily endorse this paragraph.

For example, users currently cannot associate an OME-Zarr file type with their favorite image viewer (no "double click" functionality), cannot effortlessly use their OME-Zarr images with existing file-centric tooling, nor can they easily share a few small OME-Zarr images with collaborators via email.
OME-Zarr's lack of support for file-centric workflows hampers its adoption in conventional use cases (and in turn the motivation for tool developers to support OME-Zarr).

**Challenges in tool development**:
For tool developers, the reliance on file system directories increases technical complexity in adopting OME-Zarr.
For example, most existing tools cannot merely adapt their current (file-centric) mechanisms for data handling, but need entirely new execution paths dedicated to handling (OME-Zarr) directories (e.g. dialogs for opening/saving data in directories, directory-specific drag-and-drop handlers, advanced input validation logic).
Furthermore, tool developers cannot rely on file-specific functionality/APIs provided by the operating system (e.g. file type associations, MIME types), making it more difficult to enable user-friendly interactions.

> Taken together, these challenges may discourage tool developers from implementing (user-friendly) OME-Zarr support, which would in turn negatively affect user experience with OME-Zarr.

Reviewer: Both. Eliminate the parentheticals. In this case, they should not be there. There is also an opportunity to structure the text.

Also, I'm not clear there is a strong issue regarding handling directories. You could base a workflow on the root zarr.json. You could associate an application with `*.json` or even `zarr.json` on some platforms.

> In light of the challenges related to user experience and tool development, users and implementers have already begun to store OME-Zarr hierarchies in (primarily ZIP, see *Prior art and references* section) archives, albeit in an unstandardized and thus uncoordinated fashion.

Reviewer 4: it is difficult implement -> it is difficult to implement

This can lead to format incompatibilities that may not only affect the adoption of OME-Zarr in conventional use cases, but may undermine the standardization goals of the OME-NGFF community as a whole.

> ## Proposal

Author: Do you think we should mention this in the "Proposals" section, or is listing it in the "Abandoned Ideas" / "Future possibilities" sections enough?

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 2: For some reason, Github errors when I click "resolve comment". Please consider it resolved.

To improve user experience with OME-Zarr in conventional use cases, standardize the storage of OME-Zarr hierarchies within ZIP archives.

Specifically:
- Add the ZIP format as a single-file storage container for OME-Zarr.
- Specify the location of OME-Zarr's root-level `zarr.json` within the ZIP archive.
- Recommend essential ZIP/Zarr storage parameters for creating zipped OME-Zarr files.
- Disallow embedding zipped OME-Zarr files in parent OME-Zarr hierarchies ("recursion").
- Define an OME-Zarr-specific file extension for zipped OME-Zarr files.

To minimize implementation effort and maximize compatibility, this RFC proposes a concrete archive file format as a single-file OME-Zarr storage container.
The ZIP archive file format was chosen for its simplicity, widespread adoption (e.g. on-board tooling of various operating systems, existing OME-Zarr implementations) and possibility for chunked file access enabled by the "central directory" header.

> Considering the intended (conventional) use cases for zipped OME-Zarr, these advantages were considered to outweigh disadvantages such as limitations of the ZIP archive file format in efficiently overwriting file contents (e.g. when using ZIP-level compression or if the new content differs in size).

Reviewer: I made the change in my suggestion...

Note that the ZIP archive file format is already being used to realize comparable single-file formats in other domains, such as Java archives (.jar), Office Open XML (.docx, .pptx, .xlsx), or OpenDocument (.odt, .odt, .ods, .odg).

To enable the intended user experience (e.g. avoid additional prompting of users when opening a zipped OME-Zarr file), the location of the OME-Zarr root relative to the ZIP archive root needs to be specified.
In order to avoid inconsistencies when renaming zipped OME-Zarr files, this RFC proposes to require the archive root to coincide with the OME-Zarr root directory.
In other words, according to this specification, the OME-Zarr's root-level `zarr.json` MUST be located in the root of the ZIP archive and not in a subfolder within the ZIP archive.

> Potential problems (e.g. loss of data) resulting from "accidentally" extracting the archive file in-place (e.g. using on-board tooling of some operating systems) can be alleviated by introducing a custom file extension (see below).

Reviewer: > 1. I think it is important to clarify the motivation for avoiding ambiguity wrt. the entrypoint --> user experience (e.g. avoiding additional dialogs when opening a zipped OME-Zarr file in an image viewer)

You do not mention dialogs here. The primary purpose is to avoid ambiguity. The user experience follow from that.

> 2. It is currently quite common to create image.zarr.zip with a single image.zarr directory in the ZIP archive's root (cf. BioImage Archive). This "single root directory strategy" has therefore been proposed on several occasions in the context of this RFC. I think it is important to explicitly justify why this RFC proposes to NOT have a root directory.

Actually, I'm not sure if there is a good reason to disallow a root directory other than simplicity here at the moment. Since we have a distinct file extension AND a requirement that the root zarr.json be the first entry, we actually could support a zarr.json that is not exactly at the root. The only remaining issue is simplicity and the fact this could be amended at a later time if strongly needed.

Given that we have the zarr.json as a first entry requirement, we could remove the directory restriction. Because of the file extension, we do not have to differentiate from a generic .zarr.zip.

> 3. Re your comment on data loss/custom file extension: Some (primarily Windows?) users use tools (e.g. 7-zip) that add an "Extract here" option to the context menu of .zip files. If one is not careful, unpacking a zipped OME-Zarr file using this option after previously unpacking another zipped OME-Zarr file in the same directory would result in loss of data by overwriting. Personally, I think this is a small UX corner case, but it has happened and some have used this to argue in favor of the "single root directory" alternative (even though not keeping the root directory name in sync with the ZIP file name is more problematic IMO and could result in the same outcome). But perhaps it doesn't harm to leave this explanation in the RFC (not the actual specification proposed in Sections, of course)?

The file extension itself does not actually solve the overwriting issue. Some software may add a context menu for our file extension at a later time. I have an option to extract jar files in my context menu. I think Windows will also prompt you before overwriting anything.

> Potential problems (e.g. loss of data) resulting from "accidentally" extracting the archive file in-place (e.g. using on-board tooling of some operating systems) can be alleviated by introducing a custom file extension (see below).

Reviewer: > I agree that technically we could also support other patterns (by means of the root zarr.json being the first entry, by leveraging the JSON-formatted comment in the ZIP file header, etc), but this - according to the current draft - would only work for zipped OME-Zarr files following the relevant recommendations. I don't think that adding "you can deviate from the root-level zarr.json mandate if you follow our recommendations" to a spec is a good idea.

We do not need the comment for this. If the first entry is `some/path/to/zarr.json` then we know that the root is `some/path/to`. If we did not have a unique file extension, we would not know if this was a coincidence or if was intentionally the first entry according to the spec. With the file extension, we know that someone is trying to follow the spec.

> Potential problems (e.g. loss of data) resulting from "accidentally" extracting the archive file in-place (e.g. using on-board tooling of some operating systems) can be alleviated by introducing a custom file extension (see below).

Author: > With the file extension, we know that someone is trying to follow the spec.

Not necessarily. According to the current draft, all OME-Zarr zips should end with `.ozx`, whether following the recommendations or not.

>  If the first entry is some/path/to/zarr.json then we know that the root is some/path/to.

Since we cannot rely on the recommendations to be followed, `some/path/to/zarr.json` may be a "non-root" `zarr.json`.

> Potential problems (e.g. loss of data) resulting from "accidentally" extracting the archive file in-place (e.g. using on-board tooling of some operating systems) can be alleviated by introducing a custom file extension (see below).

Reviewer: The root zarr.json requirement is a MUST in this specification. If that is not followed, then it's not compliant.

> Potential problems (e.g. loss of data) resulting from "accidentally" extracting the archive file in-place (e.g. using on-board tooling of some operating systems) can be alleviated by introducing a custom file extension (see below).

Author: Hi @mkitti, I'm not sure how to best proceed here. Do you want to respond (perhaps update your suggestion), or should I mark this conversation as resolved?

To facilitate the performant reading of zipped OME-Zarr files, a set of essential ZIP/Zarr storage parameters are recommended in this RFC.
These include recommendations to disable ZIP-level compression (to avoid "double compression" when using Zarr compression codecs), to make use of Zarr's sharding codec (to avoid inflating the number of central directory records in the ZIP file header), to list all `zarr.json` files at the beginning of the central directory header in a breadth-first order (to enable efficient metadata parsing), and to write the root-level `zarr.json` as the first ZIP file entry (to enable efficient reading by tools that do not consider the central directory header).

> Zipped OME-Zarr files may include an OME-Zarr-specific "archive comment" in the ZIP file header to indicate compliance with these recommendations, further facilitating efficient data/metadata access.

Reviewer: Otherwise one would need to parse the entire directory to get a tree of what is contained within the zip file, possibly including millions of chunks. If all the zarr.json is in the beginning, then we only need to read the directory until the first non-json file to get the tree structure and all metadata. See also "consolidated metadata".

> Zipped OME-Zarr files may include an OME-Zarr-specific "archive comment" in the ZIP file header to indicate compliance with these recommendations, further facilitating efficient data/metadata access.

Author: @normanrz the part you copied only concerns the order of the zarr.json files in the central directory header, not the actual order of the files (entries) in the archive

> Zipped OME-Zarr files may include an OME-Zarr-specific "archive comment" in the ZIP file header to indicate compliance with these recommendations, further facilitating efficient data/metadata access.

Reviewer 2: I really don't have a strong opinion here. I believe the `zipfile` Python module does not distinguish between adding files as first entry in the central and first entry in the zip file. I don't see a huge downside for storing all zarr.json first both in the central directory and the file.

Note that this also implicitly prohibits "recursive zipping", i.e. the embedding of single-file OME-Zarr files within a parent ZIP archive that would otherwise be a valid single-file OME-Zarr file.
This restriction may be revised in the future, especially in the light of the "collections" RFC.

Finally, this RFC also defines a new file extension to be used specifically with zipped OME-Zarr files.
This should enable file type detection (in absence of a magic number), improve user experience (e.g. by enabling file type association), avoid "accidental" in-place extraction (e.g. using on-board tooling of some operating systems) and encourage the use of OME-Zarr-specific tooling for creating zipped OME-Zarr files (to follow the recommendations listed earlier).

## Sections

Amend the specification with the following section:

### Single-file OME-Zarr

This section specifies how to store an OME-Zarr hierarchy within a single file.

#### Zipped OME-Zarr files

An OME-Zarr hierarchy MAY be stored within a ZIP archive.

For a ZIP file to be referred to as a single-file OME-Zarr file, its root MUST correspond to the root of an OME-Zarr hierarchy.

> In other words, the OME-Zarr's root-level `zarr.json` MUST be located in the root of the ZIP archive.

Author: I agree that the "in other words" here is a bit wordy. However, this sentence just reiterates (hopefully: clarifies) the previous one. Do you think we should "unlink" the two sentences by removing the "in other words" prefix? I'm a bit afraid that doing so will make people search for additional meaning in either of the two sentences that isn't captured by the other.

Alternatively, we could just completely remove the second sentence and leave the first sentence without clarification?

> In other words, the OME-Zarr's root-level `zarr.json` MUST be located in the root of the ZIP archive.

Reviewer: The previous statement does not mention zarr.json. This statement is not a rewording of the prior statement. It is a slightly different statement. One of these files could be unzipped into an existing Zarr hieararchy.

> In other words, the OME-Zarr's root-level `zarr.json` MUST be located in the root of the ZIP archive.

Reviewer: We have two statements.
1. A ZIP file's root MUST correspond to the root of an OME-Zarr hierarchy.
2. The OME-Zarr's root-level `zarr.json` MUST be located in the root of the ZIP archive.

For those two statements to be equivalent, the implication must be bidirectional. That is "A ZIP file's root MUST correspond to the root of an OME-Zarr hiearchy if and only if the OME-Zarr's root-level `zarr.json` MUST be located in the root of the ZIP archive."

The first statement leaves open the possibility that there may be more than one OME-Zarr hierarchy since it uses "an" and does not clearly specify any versioning. The second statement implies the use of OME-NGFF v0.5 / Zarr v3 as oppposed to OME-NGFF v0.4 / Zarr v2. Thus the implication fails if there are separate disconnected OME-Zarr hiearchies or if the OME-Zarr hierarchy is Zarr v2 or Zarr v3.

Consider the following tree layout. Due to the lack of implicit groups, ther are three disconnected Zarr hierarchies present.
```
.
├── a
│   ├── b
│   │   └── zarr.json
│   └── c
│       └── zarr.json
└── zarr.json
```

Another possibility is there is that there is in fact a single hieararchy but the two groups or arrays are called `a/b` and `a/c`.

If you think they are equivalent statements, perhaps we should eliminate the first statement since it is less clear.

However, perhaps further clarification is needed that there can only be a single OME-Zarr hieararchy within the zip file. 

```
Only a single OME-Zarr hierarchy MAY be stored within a ZIP archive.
The root of the ZIP archive MUST correspond to the root of the OME-Zarr hierarchy.
In other words, the OME-Zarr's root-level `zarr.json` MUST be located in the root of the ZIP archive.
```

Another question that arises here is whether a compliant file could contain no OME-Zarr hiearchy at all and be empty. At the moment, I think this is not valid. A minimal OME-Zarr zip MUST contain at least a single zarr.json.

> In other words, the OME-Zarr's root-level `zarr.json` MUST be located in the root of the ZIP archive.

Author: Thanks for this! I've adopted your suggestion regarding number of OME-Zarr hierarchies in https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/316/commits/8253efe0d93993ca90848c8a7495ea34f4eba4d6, which auto-resolved this conversation. Please unresolve if necessary.

When creating zipped OME-Zarr files, it is RECOMMENDED to disable ZIP-level compression.
It is further RECOMMENDED to use Zarr's sharding codec to reduce the number of entries within the ZIP archive.
All `zarr.json` files SHOULD be listed first in the central directory header, in a breadth-first order.
The root-level `zarr.json` SHOULD be the first ZIP file entry.

> The null-terminated UTF-8-encoded string `OZX####` (with `####` replaced by the zero-padded semantic OME-Zarr MAJOR.MINOR version, e.g. `OZX0102` for version 1.2) MAY be used as a ZIP archive comment to indicate that a zipped OME-Zarr file adheres to all recommendations in this paragraph.

Author: Point 2: I like adding the constraint (many chunks) for the sharding recommendation, but I'm a bit hesitant of specifying concrete numbers here, as the limit might be dependent on use case. On the other hand, specifying a constraint without actual numbers may be a bit pointless?

Point 3 ("included afterwards") does not strictly match your suggestion in the "Proposal" section ("at the beginning"):
> Include all `zarr.json` files at the beginning of the file and the beginning of central directory header in a breadth-first order starting with the root-level `zarr.json as the first ZIP file entry.

Point 4: Do you think we should make this optional (MAY, original version) or RECOMMENDED (your suggestion)?

> The null-terminated UTF-8-encoded string `OZX####` (with `####` replaced by the zero-padded semantic OME-Zarr MAJOR.MINOR version, e.g. `OZX0102` for version 1.2) MAY be used as a ZIP archive comment to indicate that a zipped OME-Zarr file adheres to all recommendations in this paragraph.

Reviewer: We need to clarify "many" somehow. If I had my way completely, we would always shard no matter what even if that might be mean a single shard for some small arrays.

> The null-terminated UTF-8-encoded string `OZX####` (with `####` replaced by the zero-padded semantic OME-Zarr MAJOR.MINOR version, e.g. `OZX0102` for version 1.2) MAY be used as a ZIP archive comment to indicate that a zipped OME-Zarr file adheres to all recommendations in this paragraph.

Reviewer 2: I think it is ok to put in a specific number, because it is a SHOULD anyways.
My gut feeling would be that 100s of files are ok, but 1000s start to become problematic.
To always use sharding would also be fine with me.

> The null-terminated UTF-8-encoded string `OZX####` (with `####` replaced by the zero-padded semantic OME-Zarr MAJOR.MINOR version, e.g. `OZX0102` for version 1.2) MAY be used as a ZIP archive comment to indicate that a zipped OME-Zarr file adheres to all recommendations in this paragraph.

Author: I don't feel sufficiently qualified or experienced to discuss specific numbers (100, 1000, ...) in this context. If you @mkitti @normanrz can agree on a number, I'd be happy to add the constraint. I'd also be ok with keeping this part as is, i.e. recommend to always using sharding.

> The null-terminated UTF-8-encoded string `OZX####` (with `####` replaced by the zero-padded semantic OME-Zarr MAJOR.MINOR version, e.g. `OZX0102` for version 1.2) MAY be used as a ZIP archive comment to indicate that a zipped OME-Zarr file adheres to all recommendations in this paragraph.

Author: > ah I see now that these are already scoped as recommendations. In this case, I don't think any normative language (SHOULD) is warranted here.

Maybe I'm misreading this, but quoting https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119:

> SHOULD: This word, or the adjective "RECOMMENDED", mean that there
   may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore a
   particular item, but the full implications must be understood and
   carefully weighed before choosing a different course.

> The null-terminated UTF-8-encoded string `OZX####` (with `####` replaced by the zero-padded semantic OME-Zarr MAJOR.MINOR version, e.g. `OZX0102` for version 1.2) MAY be used as a ZIP archive comment to indicate that a zipped OME-Zarr file adheres to all recommendations in this paragraph.

Reviewer 5: ah that's helpful, I didn't know SHOULD was synonymous with RECOMMENDED! In that case, I think the simplest thing is to just say "The sharding codec SHOULD be used to minimize the number of files", and leave specific numbers out of it.

> The null-terminated UTF-8-encoded string `OZX####` (with `####` replaced by the zero-padded semantic OME-Zarr MAJOR.MINOR version, e.g. `OZX0102` for version 1.2) MAY be used as a ZIP archive comment to indicate that a zipped OME-Zarr file adheres to all recommendations in this paragraph.

Reviewer: One other need for sharding here is to introduce hierarchy to the index.

With a flat index as with zip, if you have a large array and a small array in the same Zarr hierarchy, access to the small array is affected by the large array due to the large number of entries needed for the large array.

Sharding alleviates this because it isolates the indexes for the two arrays. Sharding turns this from a flat data format into a hierarchical data format.

The alternative is recursive zip files which we are currently trying to not do.

While too numerous to list here, relevant search phrases include "OME-Zarr single file", "OME-Zarr zip", "OME-Zarr local file system" and "Zarr ZipStore".

Facilitator: Josh Moore (German BioImaging)

Suggested reviewers:
- Curtis Rueden (University of Wisconsin-Madison, United States) @ctrueden
- Davis Bennett (Germany) @d-v-b
- Dominik Kutra (EMBL Heidelberg, Germany) @k-dominik
<!-- - Johannes Soltwedel (TU Dresden, Germany) @jo-mueller -->
- Juan Nunez-Iglesias (Monash University, Australia) @jni
- Luca Marconato (EMBL Heidelberg, Germany) @LucaMarconato
<!-- - Matthew McCormick (Fideus Labs, United States) @thewtex -->
<!-- - Tong Li (Wellcome Sanger Institute, United Kingdom) @BioinfoTongLI -->
- BioImage Archive team members (EMBL-EBI, United Kingdom), e.g. @matthewh-ebi @kbab

Consulted: everyone mentioned in [PR #316](https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/316)

Socialization: see Prior art and references; the draft was further discussed among co-authors on August 27th, 2025 ([minutes](https://hackmd.io/@eAPtiynRTLOLwk5Vzg8AqQ/rJ403lIYlg)).

## Implementation (Recommended Header)

> TODO

Author: I agree! Do you have a specific existing sharding-enabled OME-Zarr v0.5 hierarchy in mind for this? Any idea where we could/should host the generated zipped OME-Zarr file?

> TODO

Reviewer 5: > Any idea where we could/should host the generated zipped OME-Zarr file?

use a small amount of data and add it to this branch

> TODO

Reviewer 2: We could use any dataset from [the IDR gallery](https://idr.github.io/ome-ngff-samples/), e.g. https://ome.github.io/ome-ngff-validator/?source=https://uk1s3.embassy.ebi.ac.uk/idr/zarr/v0.5/idr0062A/6001240_labels.zarr.
I can take a look at converting and uploading.

> TODO

Author: Resolving this in favor of https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/316/commits/b3e1099befc952a1f4246b60432eb116b3dec37d

> # RFC-9: Single-file OME-Zarr

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# RFC-9: Single-zip-file OME-Zarr
```

I'm not sure if this will be the only way to store Zarr in a single file.

Author: Renamed in https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/316/commits/81ad2844ec7b2c0832b0b43afc80660cb45f7978

In particular this prohibits "recursive zipping", the embedding of a zipped OME-Zarr file within a parent zipped OME-Zarr file.
This restriction may be revised in the future, especially in the light of the "collections" RFC.

Furthermore, this RFC prohibits splitting up the ZIP archive into multiple files ("multi-volume archives"), in favor of directory-backed OME-Zarr and Zarr's sharding codec.

Finally, this RFC also defines a new file extension to be used specifically with zipped OME-Zarr files.
This should enable file type detection (in absence of a magic number), improve user experience (e.g. by enabling file type association), avoid "accidental" in-place extraction (e.g. using on-board tooling of some operating systems) and encourage the use of OME-Zarr-specific tooling for creating zipped OME-Zarr files (to follow the recommendations listed earlier).

Note that this RFC does not - semantically or otherwise - restrict the data content of OME-Zarr hierarchies to be stored in zipped OME-Zarr files.

## Specification

Amend the specification with the following section:

> ### Single-file OME-Zarr

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Single-zipfile OME-Zarr
```

Author: Zipped OME-Zarr files (header 4) are a specific realization (subheader) of Single-file OME-Zarr (header 3). See also https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/316#discussion_r2496472880.

> This section specifies how to store an OME-Zarr hierarchy within a single file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section specifies how to store an OME-Zarr hierarchy within a single zip file.
```

Author: Zipped OME-Zarr files (header 4) are a specific realization (subheader) of Single-file OME-Zarr (header 3). See also https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/316#discussion_r2496472880.

#### Zipped OME-Zarr files

An OME-Zarr hierarchy MAY be stored within a ZIP archive.

> For a ZIP file to be referred to as a single-file OME-Zarr, it MUST contain exactly one OME-Zarr hierarchy.

Author: Resolved in https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/316/commits/63ee004897b22091a0353fb54d06c378f2f0c498

The root of the ZIP archive MUST correspond to the root of the OME-Zarr hierarchy, and it MUST contain the the OME-Zarr's root-level `zarr.json`.

When creating zipped OME-Zarr files, the following are RECOMMENDED:

> - The ZIP64 format extension SHOULD be used to allow for files larger than 4 GiB.

Author: The intention was to recommend ZIP64 for all cases. The "to allow for files larger than 4 GiB" was not meant as constraint but as explanation/justification. I will remove the "to allow for files larger than 4 GiB" part to avoid confusion.

> - The ZIP64 format extension SHOULD be used to allow for files larger than 4 GiB.

Author: How about now? https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/316/commits/eb3821b8e02ee878b4986e529704610e93d7ece0

- ZIP-level compression SHOULD be disabled in favor of Zarr-level compression codecs.
- The sharding codec SHOULD be used to reduce the number of entries within the ZIP archive.
- The root-level `zarr.json` file SHOULD be the first ZIP file entry and the first entry in the central directory header; other `zarr.json` files SHOULD follow immediately afterwards, in breadth-first order.

> These recommendations are REQUIRED for a zipped OME-Zarr file specialization from here on referred to as "recommended variant".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These recommendations are REQUIRED for a "OME-Zarr zip file".
```

While there may be zip files containing Zarr hierarchies with OME-metadata they are not OME-Zarr zip files.

> If a zipped OME-Zarr file is of the recommended variant, its ZIP archive comment SHOULD contain null-terminated UTF-8-encoded JSON with an `ome` attribute that holds a `version` key with the OME-Zarr version as string value, equivalent to `{"ome": { "version": "XX.YY" }}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a zipped OME-Zarr file is of the recommended variant, its ZIP archive comment MUST contain null-terminated UTF-8-encoded JSON with an `ome` attribute that holds a `version` key with the OME-Zarr version as string value, equivalent to `{"ome": { "version": "XX.YY" }}`.
```

> If a zipped OME-Zarr file is of the recommended variant, its ZIP archive comment SHOULD contain null-terminated UTF-8-encoded JSON with an `ome` attribute that holds a `version` key with the OME-Zarr version as string value, equivalent to `{"ome": { "version": "XX.YY" }}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An OME-Zarr zip file MUST contain ZIP archive comment containing a null-terminated UTF-8-encoded JSON with an `ome` attribute that holds a `version` key with the OME-Zarr version as string value, equivalent to `{"ome": { "version": "XX.YY" }}`.
```

Conversely, zipped OME-Zarr files that do not meet all requirements for the recommended variant SHALL NOT contain this archive comment.

> Zipped OME-Zarr files SHALL NOT be embedded in a parent OME-Zarr hierarchy (as a sub-hierarchy or otherwise).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OME-Zarr zip files SHALL NOT be embedded in a parent OME-Zarr hierarchy (as a sub-hierarchy or otherwise).
```

Actually, I'm not sure about this paragraph. I do not want OME-Zarr zip files in other OME-Zarr zip files at this time, but I do not see a particular problem with these representing part of a hierarchy that is unzipped.
